# streamy-json-parser
A JSON parser that receives its input as a stream of strings

## Overview

This library offers a lightweight, streaming JSON parser that processes input incrementally as it arrives. Rather than waiting for the entire JSON string, you can access parsed data progressively while the input is still being received.

Typical use cases include:
* Parsing JSON output from slow or streaming sources (such as LLM APIs), allowing you to render or process data as soon as it becomes available.
* Handling large JSON payloads efficiently by processing them piece by piece, reducing memory usage and latency.

## Usage

### Installation

To install the package, run
```bash
npm install streamy-json-parser
```

To use the package in a module, use one of the following statements depending on the module system you are using:
```javascript
import streamy_json_parser from 'streamy-json-parser';
import {Parser, parse, SyntaxError} from 'streamy-json-parser';
const streamy_json_parser = require('streamy-json-parser');
const {Parser, parse, SyntaxError} = require('streamy-json-parser');
```

### The `Parser` class

The `Parser` class is the primary way to interact with this library. Here’s a simple
example demonstrating how to use it:
```javascript
let parser = new Parser();
parser.push('{"foo": 1, bar');
console.log(parser.getValue());  // Log the partially parsed object.
parser.push(': [2');
console.log(parser.getValue());  // Log the partially parsed object.
parser.push(', 3]}');
parser.close();
console.log(parser.getValue());  // Log the full parsed object.
```

The `Parser` class has the following constructor and methods:
* `Parser(options?)`: Create a new parser object with the specified options. (See the "Options" section below.)
* `.push(string)`: Add a string to the input stream and parses it.
* `.close()`: Declare the input stream as complete and complete parsing.
* `.reset()`: Reset the parser to its initial state so that a new input string can be parsed.
* `.getValue()`: Get the value which has been parsed so far.  ***Warning!*** Do not alter the value
  return by `.getValue()` as it would break the parsing.
* `.takeEvents()`: Retrieve the events generated by the parser (since the last call to `takeEvents`).
  (See the "Events" section below.)
* `.setPlaceholder(value)`: Set an initial object before parsing is done. The parsed value is constructed
  over this object which is progressively updated.

### The `parse` function

The `parse` function provides an alternative interface using JavaScript iterators.

```javascript
const input = [
  '{"foo": 1, bar',
  ': [2',
  ', 3]}'
];
const iterator = input[Symbol.iterator]();
for (const {root, done} of parse(iterator)) {
  console.log(root);
  if (done) console.log('Parsing is complete');
}
```

The parse function takes two arguments:
* `iterator`: A string iterator, representing the input to be part,
* `options` (optional): The options object (see below.)

It returns an iterator whose items are objects with the following properties:
* `root`: The parsed value (same as `.getValue()`),
* `done`: `true` if parsing is complete,
* `events`: The events produced in this iteration (if the option `track_events` is set).

### Options

Parser options are set through a record object that may contain the following properties:
* `include_incomplete_strings` (default: `false`): If `true`, incomplete strings are added
  to the output value at the end of each input chunk. If `false`, strings are added to the
  output value object only when they are complete.  You can also set this option to a string
  value, which is in this case added as a suffix to incomplete string values (e.g. use "...").
* `track_events`: Track additional, SAX-style, events through parsing.  See the "Events" section
  below.

### Events

In addition to the incrementally built value, the parser can produce SAX-style events through
parsing. The following events are generated:
* `{type: "set", path: [...]}`: A literal value is set,
* `{type: "begin", path: [...]}`: Parsing of an object or array begins,
* `{type: "end", path: [...]}`: Parsing of an object or array ends.

In these events, the `.path` property contains an array designating the path of the currently
parsed node of the object relative to the root object (as returned by `.getValue()`). Each item
of `.path` is either a string (for the property name of an object) or an integer (for the index of an array).
For instance, if `.path` is `["foo", 2, "bar"]`, the events refer to the node `.getValue()["foo"][2]["bar"]`.

## TODOs

* New features
  * Function to report error locations in a human readable manner
  * Delete values during parsing to free memory for large input
  * Add objects to events
* Optimization
  * Simplify parser stack
  * Simplify lexer state
  * Move Include incomplete string
  * Simplify location for literal (could we freeze it?)
